[Applause]
1996 when I was 18 years old the golden
opportunity to go on an international
exchange program ironically on
Australian who prefers proper iced tea
cold weather so both excited and
cheerful when I go on a plane to Iceland
after just having farewell with my
parents and brothers goodbye I was
walking into the home of a beautiful
Icelandic family who took me hiking and
helped me get a grasp of the melodic
Icelandic language I struggled a bit
with the initial period of homesickness
I snowboarded out of school and I slept
a lot two hours of chemistry class in
the language that you don't yet fully
understand can be a pretty good sedative
my teacher recommended I try out for the
school play
just give it any more socially active
turns out I didn't end up being part of
the play but through it I met Fortis we
shared a lovely teenage romance and we
met at lunch times for this hold hands
and walk around old downtown reykjavik a
national welcoming family and she met my
friends we've been in a budding
relationship for a good over a month
when our school's Christmas ball was
held I was 16 and in love for the first
time going together to the Christmas
dance was a public confirmation of our
relationship and I felt like the
luckiest girl in the world no longer a
child but a young woman hi on my
newfound maturity I felt it was only
natural to try drinking rum for the
first time that night - I was a bad idea
I became very ill drifting in and out of
consciousness in between spasms of
convulsive vomiting and the security
guards wanted to call me an ambulance
but Tom acted as my knight in shining
armor and told them he'd take me home it
was like a fairy tale and strong arms
around me laying me in the
my bed but the gratitude that I felt
towards him soon turned to horror as he
proceeded to take off my clothes and get
on top of me my head had cleared up but
my body was still too weak to fight back
and the pain was blinding I thought I'd
be severed in two in order to stay sane
I silently counted the seconds on my
alarm clock and ever since that night
I've known that there are 7200 seconds
in two hours despite limping for days
and crying for weeks
this incident didn't fit my ideas about
rape like I'd seen on TV Tom was an
unarmed lunatic he was my boyfriend and
it didn't happen in a seedy alleyway it
happened in my own bed by the time I
could identify what had happened to me
as rape he had completed his exchange
program and left for Australia so told
myself it was pointless to dress what
had happened and besides it had to have
been my fault somehow
I was raised in a world where girls are
taught but they get raped for a reason
their skirt was too short their smile
was too wide their breath smelled of
alcohol and I was guilty of all of those
things so the shame had to be mine it
took me years to realize that only one
thing could have stopped me from being
raped that night and it wasn't my skirt
it wasn't my smile it wasn't my childish
trust the only thing that could have
stopped me from being raped that night
is the man who raped me had he stopped
himself I have vague memories of the
next day the after-effects is drinking
certain halona I tried to start nothing
more but I didn't shop at four deuces
door it is important to now state that
they didn't see my deed for what it was
the word rape didn't echo around my mind
as it
should have and I wasn't crucifying
myself with memories of the night before
it wasn't so much a conscious refusal
it was more like any acknowledgment of
reality was forbidden
my definition of my actions completely
refuted any recognition of the event
strong right cause justice to be honest
I repudiated the entire Act in the days
afterwards and when I was committing it
I disavowed the truth by convincing
myself it was sex and not rape and this
is a lie
I felt spine bending guilt for I broke
up with footages for a couple of days
later and then saw her a number of times
during the remain in my year in Iceland
filling a sharp scars heavy heart in
this each time deep down I knew I'd done
something immeasurably wrong but without
planning it I sunk the memories deep and
then I tied a rope to them what followed
is a nine-year period that conversely
titles as denial and running when I got
a chance to identify the real torment
that I caused I didn't stand still long
enough to do so that be by a distraction
substance use thrill seeking of a
scrupulous policing of my inner speak I
refused to be static and silent with
this noise I also drew heavily upon
other parts of my life to construct a
picture of who I was
I was a surfer social science student a
friend to good people a loved brother
and son and outdoor recreation guide and
eventually a youth worker I gripped
tight to the simple notion that I wasn't
a bad person I didn't think I had this
in my bones thought I was made up of
something else
so my nurtured upbringing my loving
extended family and role models people
close to me were warm and genuine in
their spectrum towards women took me a
long time to stare down this dark corner
of my
and to ask a question nine years after
the Christmas dance I was 25 years old
and headed straight for a nervous
breakdown my self-worth was buried under
a soul-crushing load of silence that
isolated me from everyone that I cared
about and I was consumed with misplaced
hatred and anger that I took out on
myself one day I stormed out of the door
and tears after a fight with a loved one
and I wandered into a cafe where I asked
the waitress for a pen I always had a
notebook with me claiming that it was to
jot down ideas and moments of
inspiration but the truth was that I
needed to be constantly fidgeting
because in moments of stillness
I found myself counting seconds again
but that day I watched and wander as a
word streamed out of my pen forming the
most pivotal letter I've ever written
addressed to Tom along with an account
of the violence that he subjected me to
the words I want to find forgiveness
beard back at me
surprising nobody more than myself the
deep down I realized that this was my
way out of my suffering because
regardless of whether or not he deserved
my forgiveness
I deserved peace my era of shame was
over before sending the letter I
prepared myself for all kinds of
negative responses or what I found
likeliest no response whatsoever the
only outcome that I didn't prepare
myself for it was the one that I then
got a typed confession from Tom full of
disarming regrets as it turns out e two
had been imprisoned by silence and this
marked the start as an eight year long
correspondence that God knows was never
easy but always honest i relieved myself
of the burdens that I'd wrongfully
shouldered and he in turn wholeheartedly
owned up to what he'd done a written
exchanges became a platform to dissect
the consequences of that night
they were everything from gut-wrenching
to healing beyond words and yet it
didn't bring about closure for me
perhaps because the email format didn't
feel personal enough perhaps because
it's easy to be brave when you're hiding
behind a computer screen on the other
side of the planet but we'd begun a
dialogue that I felt was necessary to
explore to its fullest so after eight
years of writing and nearly 16 years
after that dire night I mustered the
courage to propose a wild idea that we'd
meet up in person and face our past once
and for all Iceland and Australia are
geographically like this and in the
middle of the - is South Africa and we
decide upon the city of Cape Town and
then we met for one week the city itself
proved to be a stunningly powerful
environment to focus on reconciliation
and forgiveness no else is healing and
reproach meant being tested like it has
in South Africa as a nation so they were
taught to sit within the truth of its
past and to listen to the details of its
history knowing has only magnified the
effect that Cape Town had on us over the
course of this week we literally spoke
our life stories to each other from
start to finish and this was about
analysing our own history we followed a
strict policy of being honest this also
came with a certain exposure and open
chested vulnerability there were gushing
confessions in moments where we just
absolutely couldn't say them the other
person's experience the seismic effects
of sexual violence was spoken aloud and
felt face to face at other times though
we found a soaring clarity and even some
totally unexpected but liberating Alaska
when it came down to us we did our best
to listen to each other intently and now
individual realities were aired with an
an unfiltered purity we couldn't do any
less than light in the soul wanting to
take revenge is a very human emotion
instinctual even and all I wanted to do
for years was to hurt Tom's back as
deeply as he had hurt me but had I not
found a way out of the hatred and anger
I'm not sure I'd be standing here today
that isn't to say that I didn't have my
doubts along the way when the plane
bounced on that landing strip in Cape
Town
I remember thinking why did I not just
get myself a therapist and a bottle of
vodka like a normal person would do at
times a search for understanding in Cape
Town felt like an impossible quest and
all I wanted to do was to give up and go
home to my loving husband bathe it in
our Sun but despite of our difficulties
this journey did result in a victorious
feeling that lights a triumph over
darkness that something constructive
could be built out of the ruins I read
somewhere that you should try and be the
person that you needed when you were
younger and back when I was a teenager I
would have needed to know that the shame
wasn't mine that there's hope after rape
you can even find happiness like I share
with my husband today which is why I
started writing feverishly upon my
return from Cape Town resulting in a
book co-authored by Tom that we hope can
be of use to people from both ends of
the perpetrator survivor scale if
nothing else it's a story that we would
have needed to hear when we were younger
given the nature of our story I know the
words that inevitably accompany it
victim rapists and labels are way too
organized concepts but they can also be
dehumanizing and
our connotations once someone's been
deemed a victim it's that much easier to
file them away as someone damaged
dishonored less then and likewise when
someone's been branded a rapist it's
that much easier to call and my monster
inhuman
how will we understand what it is in
human societies that produces violence
if we refuse to recognize the humanity
of those who commit it and huh and how
can we empower survivors if we're making
them feel less than how can we discuss
solutions to one of the biggest threats
to the lives of women and children
around the world if the very words we
use are part of the problem from what
I've now learned my actions that night
in 1996 were a self-centered taking I
felt deserving of thought is his body
I've had primarily positive social
influences and examples of equitable
behavior around me but on that occasion
I chose to draw upon the negative ones
the ones that see women as having less
intrinsic worth and have men having some
unspoken and symbolic claim to their
bodies these influences I speak over
external to me though and it was only me
in that room making choices nobody else
when you own something and really square
up to your culpability I do think a
surprising thing can happen that's what
I call a paradox of ownership I thought
I'd buckle under the weight of
responsibility I thought my certificate
of humanity would be burnt instead I was
offered to really own what I did and
found that it didn't possess the
entirety of Who I am
put simply something you've done doesn't
have to constitute the sum of who you
are the noise in my head abated
the indulgent self-pity was starved of
oxygen and it was replaced with the
clean air of acceptance an acceptance
that I did hurt this wonderful person
standing next to me an acceptance that I
am part of a large and shockingly
everyday grouping of men who have been
sexually violent towards their partners
don't underestimate the power of work
thank authorities that I raped her
change my accord with myself as well as
with her but most importantly the blame
transferred from Fortis to me far too
often their responsibility is attributed
to female survivors of sexual violence
and not the males who enacted far too
often the denial and running these all
parties at a great distance from the
truth there's definitely a public
conversation happening now and like a
lot of people we happened that there's
less retreating from this difficult but
important discussion I feel a real
responsibility to add our voices to it
what we did is not a formula that we're
prescribing for others nobody has the
right to tell anyone else how to handle
their deepest pain or their greatest
error breaking your silence is never
easy and depending on where you are in
the world it can even be deadly to speak
out about rape I realize that even the
most traumatic events of my life is
still a testament to my privilege
because I can talk about it without
getting ostracized or even killed
but with that privilege of having a
voice comes with responsibilities of
using it that's the least I owe my
fellow survivors who can't the story
we've just relayed is unique and yet it
is so common with sexual violence being
a global pandemic but it doesn't have to
be
that way one of the things that I found
useful in my own healing journey is
educating myself about sexual violence
and as a result I've been reading
writing and speaking about this issue
for over a decade now going to
conferences around the world and in my
experience the attendees of such events
are almost exclusively women but it's
about time that we stop treating sexual
violence as a women's issue
a majority of sexual violence against
women and men is perpetrated by men and
yet their voices are sorely
underrepresented in this discussion but
all of us are needed here just imagine
all the suffering we could alleviate if
we dared to face this issue together
thank you
[Applause]